### SeqBreed: a python tool to evaluate genomic prediction in complex scenarios
#### Miguel Perez-Enciso (miguel.perez@uab.es)
#### With contributions from Laura M Zingaretti (m.lau.zingaretti@gmail.com), Lino Ramirez-Ayala (linocesar.ramirez@cragenomica.es)

SeqBreed.py is a general python3 software to simulate populations under (genomic) selection. 
It inherits most of funcionality from SBVB ([Perez-Enciso et al., 2017](http://www.genetics.org/content/205/2/939.long), 
https://github.com/miguelperezenciso/sbvb1) and pSBVB ([Zingaretti et al. 2018](http://www.g3journal.org/content/9/2/327.long),
 https://github.com/lauzingaretti/pSBVB) softwares but is much more user friendly and adds numerous new features
  such as easy selection implementation (BLUP, GBLUP, SSTEP), plots (PCA, GWAS)... 

Its main target is to simulate genomic selection experiments but can be used as well to study the performance of GWAS or,
in general, study the dynamics of complex traits under numerous selection criteria: random mass selection, 
BLUP, GBLUP and single step GBLUP are currently implemented. 

It can accommodate any number of complex phenotypes controlled by an arbitrary number of loci 
(epistasis is not currently implemented though). Strict autopolyploid genomes can be considered.

In order to get full control of all **SeqBreed** functionalities, some python knowledge is recommended.
However, this is not necessary for a basic usage as shown in the examples provided.

**NOTE:** SeqBreed is designed for use in short term breeding experiments and not long term experiments. 
For instance, no new mutations are generated. We recommend to use real sequence data or high density SNP 
data as startup.  

### Requirements
See requirements.txt

### Installation
Clone the repository and run:

`sudo python3 -m pip install SeqBreed-XXX.whl`

To access the module, include the following in the program: 

    from SeqBreed import genome as gg
    from SeqBreed.selection import selection as sel

### Quick startup
The basic phylosophy of **SeqBreed** is to have a file with SNP data from the founder population (in vcf format), 
specify causal SNPs (QTNs) and their effects for every phenotype (either in a file or can be simulated by the program)
and, optionally, a pedigree that is used for gene-dropping. In addition to sequence data, the user can specify a subset 
of SNPs (a chip) that can be used to implement genomic selection, do a PCA or a GWAS. Next, new individuals can be manually added to the extant population
or a selection scheme can be automatically implemented. At any stage, data can be inspected, exported or plotted via a 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). 

**All QTNs and all chip SNPs must be in the vcf file, they are removed otherwise.** 

A quick code example is shown below (for more details, check accompanying python notebook, and continue reading)

```
 
# generic modules
import numpy as np
import sys
import copy
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# specific seqbreed modules
from SeqBreed import genome as gg
from SeqBreed.selection import selection as sel

# pos files simply contain chromosome and base pair, either space or tab separated, 
# lines starting with '#' in pos and other input files are ignored
vcffile    = 'test.vcf.gz' # This is the vcf file with genotypes
chipfile   = 'chip2.pos'   # This chip file contains a subset of snp positions
chip1file  = 'chr1.pos'    # This chip file contains snp positions from chr 1
seqposfile = 'seq.pos'     # This file contains snp positions and is generated by SeqBreed

# This generates a GFounder object that contains founder genotypes
# ploidy and no. of individuals are inferred
gbase = gg.GFounder(vcfFile=vcffile, snpFile=seqposfile)
gbase.ploidy  # this is ploidy

# This generates a Genome object that contains genome features such as recomb. rate, no. of chrs, etc
# Varying recombination rates, sex and mitochondrial chromosomes can be specified here
gfeatures = gg.Genome(snpFile=seqposfile, ploidy=gbase.ploidy)
gfeatures.print()  # prints some basic info

# This generates a QTN object that contains QTN positions and effects
# 10 QTN additive effects are sampled form a gamma, valid only for one phenotype
# heritability is 0.5
qtn = gg.QTNs(h2=[0.5], genome=gfeatures, nqtn=10)
qtn.get_var(gfeatures, gbase)  # this computes theoretical qtn variances under equilibrium 
qtn.print(gfeatures)           # prints info
qtn.plot()                     # does some plots

# This generates a Population object that contains individual genomes 
# It also computes Var E (environmental variance) to match desired h2 given observed genotypes
# If pedFile is None, a default pedigree is generated for base population individuals only
pop = gg.Population(gfeatures, pedFile=None, qtns=qtn, gfounders=gbase)
pop.print('pop.out')          # prints pop info in file 'pop.out'
qtn.print(gfeatures)          # prints qtn info again, now contains VarE
pop.inds[-1].print(gfeatures) # prints summary of last individual, incl recombination blocks

# ALL STEPS ABOVE ARE NEEDED IN ANY SeqBreed RUN

# SOME ADDITIONAL STEPS FOLLOW:
#
# === Let us a perform a Genomic Selection experiment
#
# FIRST let us create a Chip object with snps used for selection, snp chip positions are in 'chip.pos' file
chip = gg.Chip(genome=gfeatures, chipFile='chip.pos', name='chip1')
# or you can let the program generate a chip with 30 equally spaced SNPs with MAF>0.10
chip = gg.Chip(gfeatures, gbase, nsnp=30, unif=True, minMaf=0.1, name='chip1')
# In either case you can print chip summary
chip.print(gfeatures) 

# SECOND, let us specify selection intensity
nsel = [5, 10]   # no. of males and females selected per generation
noffspring = 10  # no of offspring per female

# THIRD: Finally, selection is performed for five generations!
ngen = 5
for t in range(ngen):
    # step 0: generate marker data for evaluation with markers MAF>0.10
    X = gg.do_X(pop.inds, gfeatures, gbase, chip, minMaf=0.10)
    # EBVs are stored into pop.inds[i].ebv
    sel.doEbv(pop, criterion='gblup', X=X, h2=0.3, nh=gfeatures.ploidy)
    # step 2: pedigree with offspring of selected individuals
    newPed = sel.ReturnNewPed(pop, nsel, famsize=noffspring)
    # step 3: generates new offspring (this function adds QTN genotypes, true bvs and y)
    pop.addPed(newPed, gfeatures, qtn, gbase)

# Check response: plot phenotype and EBV by generation
pop.plot()
pop.plot(ebv=True) # EBVs of last generation are missing

#
# === Let us do a principal component analysis (PCA), or even an association study (GWAS)
#
# You can do a PCA as well, using all sequence or whatever set of snps are defined in a Chip object
#--> First you need to define sequence as a Chip object
chipseq = gg.Chip(chipFile=seqposfile, genome=gfeatures, name='seq')
#--> Second, generates matrix with genotypes
X = gg.do_X(pop.inds, gfeatures, gbase, chip=chipseq)
#--> Returns 2D PCA
pca = sel.Pca(X)
pca.fit()
pca.plot()
pca.p[:,:]   # Contains PCA values

#
# === Longing for a GWAS? No worries
#
# This performs a GWAS on first phenotype using SNPs with MAF > 0.05 from chr 1 in last 100 individuals
#--> First create Chip object if undefined
chip_chr1 = gg.Chip(genome=gfeatures, chipFile='chr1.pos', name='chr1')
#--> Second generate genotypes of last 100 individuals (say)
X = gg.do_X(pop.inds[-100:], gfeatures, gbase, chip=chip_chr1, minMaf=0.05)
#--> And do and plot the GWAS
gwas = sel.Gwas(X, chip_chr1)
gwas.fit(inds=pop.inds[-100:])   
gwas.plot()            # plots pvalue
gwas.plot(fdr=True)    # plots FDR
gwas.print(gfeatures)  # prints values

# Now we precorrect by first two PCs, using same X as in former GWAS
#--> First, extract phenotypes
y = np.array(list(ind.y[itrait] for ind in pop.inds))
#--> Second pre correct y's
y = y - pca.p[:,0] - pca.p[:,1]
#--> Third, re adjust GWAS
gwas.fit(y=y, trait=itrait)
gwas.plot(fdr=True)    # FDR

```

### Examples
* ```main.py``` and ```SeqBreed_tutorial.ipynb``` illustrates main functionalities.
* POTATO folder contains data from tetraploid potato and illustrates how to generate an F2, how to do a GWAS, 
PCA-corrected GWAS, how to simulate additional phenotypes...
* DGRP folder contains data from the Drosphila Genome Reference Panel (http://dgrp2.gnets.ncsu.edu/)
project and illustrates genomic selection, how to save and reuse big files with ```pickle```, etc. 


### Main classes
**SeqBreed** allows storing and accessing genomic and population information easily. 

* Most items of interest can be accessed directly or indirectly through the ```Population``` class. ```Population``` has a series of methods allowing generating new individuals, including the different selection steps. 
* ```GFounder``` class allows storing genotypes from base population individuals, ie, those in the vcf / gen file.
* ```Genome``` contains all relevant genome features such as number of chromosomes, recombination rates, sequence snp positions...
* ```Chip``` contains a list of SNP positions.

Besides, the ```Selection``` module contains methods to perform GWAS, Genomic Prediction, etc.

### Input
**SeqBreed** minimally only requires a genotype file in vcf or 'gen' formats, either compressed or uncompressed.
For vcf format specifications, check https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variant_Call_Format. The 'gen' format is 
simply 

    chr base_pair indiv1_allele1  indiv1_allele2  indiv2_allele1 ...

one row for each SNP, where alleles are coded as ```0, 1``` for diploids and ```0...(ploidy-1)``` for polyploids. 
For example, the following gen file contains information for 3 markers and 2 individuals:

    chr1   1000 1 0 1 1
    chrX   100034 1 1 0 0
    chrX   200000 1 1 0 1

If your genotypes file are in Plink format, you can use recoding options (https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2/data#recode) 
to generate a vcf file. See the POTATO folder for an example.

**NOTE:** **SeqBreed** recognizes vcf format if file name ends with 'vcf' or 'vcf.gz', everything else is
treated as 'gen' format. **SeqBreed** automatically recognizes whether the files are gz compressed.

**NOTE:** **SeqBreed** automatically recognizes ploidy from vcf files. Ploidy must be specified for gen files (see below).

#### IMPORTANT: No missing genotypes are allowed and SeqBreed assumes genotypes to be phased. 
This is simply because **SeqBreed** must know which are the parental haplotypes. Since this is unlikely,
phasing and imputation with some standard algorithm will do. Errors in imputation and phasing should
have virtually no effect on the conclusions to be drawn from SeqBreed simulations.

If no QTN file is provided, a predetermined number of randomly chosen QTNs can be generated by SeqBreed,
where additive qtn effects are sampled from a gamma. For more control, a qtn file is needed.  

Optional Files (see more details below and examples in the repository):
 
- **QTN file** specifying the genetic architecture: any number of loci and any number of traits are allowed. 
The format of this file is, per row, QTN position (chromosome and base pair) followed by additive and 
dominant effect for each trait. If a QTN does not affect the given trait, 0's must be employed.
- **File with (sex) specific recombination maps**: Sex and mitochondrial chromosomes can be specified. 
Auto polyploid genomes can also be specified. 
- **A starting pedigree**: If not provided, a new one is automatically generated where base individuals are unrelated. 

### Usage
A step by step example is in ```main.py``` file. Folder DGRP contains an example of sequence data from Drosophila Genome Reference Panel
(http://dgrp2.gnets.ncsu.edu/) detailing a genomic selection experiment, whereas the POTATO folder contains a GWAS example using 
data from tetraploid potato.

##### Base population
GFounder class constructor simply needs vcf file, name of output file with snp positions and minimimum
frequency (MAF) for a snp to be considered.

```gbase = gg.GFounder(vcfFile, snpFile, minMaf=0)```

It automatically determines no. of base individuals, ploidy (in vcf files), genotypes and allele frequencies.
For gen files, say 'test.gen', ploidy (say octoploid) must be specified:

```gbase = GFounder(vcfFile='test.gen', snpFile, minMaf=0, ploidy=8)```

In this case, 8 alleles by individual and SNP must be present.

**NOTE:** If unspecified, default ploidy is two. 

##### Genome features
```Genome``` class allows specifying genome features

```gfeatures = gg.Genome(snpFile, mapFile=None, XChr=None, YChr=None, MTChr=None, ploidy=gbase.ploidy)```

internally, it holds info on snp positions for each chromosome, among other variables. Ploidy is automatically
inferred in previous step (```gbase = GFounder(.)```). The mapfile has the following format:

```chr base_pair rec_rate_males rec_rate_females```

where recombination rate is in cM / Mb, and refers to the genome region up to ```base_pair```. Rec rate is set to default
(1 cM/Mb) in missing regions from the map file. this value can be modified in the code (check ```Chromosome``` class 
constructor cM2Mb = 1).

##### Specifying genetic architecture
QTN class allows specifying causative SNPs and their effects on an unlimited number of phenotypes. ```h2``` is an
array with dimension the number of traits that specify heritability for each trait.

```qtn = QTN(h2=[h2, ...], genome=gfeatures, qtnFile=None, se=None, nqtn=0, name=None)```

QTNS can be specified in three ways:

**OPTION 1:** A random number of ```nqtn``` additive qtls genome wide distributed, additive effects are sampled 
from a gamma, valid only for one phenotype.

```qtn = gg.QTNs(h2=[0.7], genome=gfeatures, nqtn=10)```

**OPTION 2:** qtnFile contains only QTN positions. add effects are sampled form a gamma, only one phenotype

```qtn = gg.QTNs(h2=[0.5], genome=gfeatures, qtnFile=qtnfile1)```

qtnFile format is:

```chr base_pair```

One line for each QTN

**OPTION 3:** qtn positions and effects are read from qtnFile, any number of phenotypes and additive /
dominance action can be specified.

```qtn = gg.QTNs(h2=[0.9, 0.3], genome=gfeatures, qtnFile=qtnfile2)```

qtnFile format is:

```chr base_pair add_eff_trait1 dom_eff_trait1 add_eff_trait2 dom_eff_trait2 ... ```

One line for each QTN.

##### Genotyping Chips
The Chip class allows efficient manipulation and storing of a genotyping array. Chips can be defined either by
reading SNP positions from a file (chipFile) or can be generated from a random or uniform set of SNPs. In the 
latter case, the number of SNPs in the chip must be specified and a minimum MAF can also be set.

    chip = Chip(gfeatures, chipFile=None, nsnp=0, unif=False, minMaf=0, name='chip_') 
    
where:

- ```gfeatures``` is a Genome object
- ```gbase``` is a GFounders object
- ```chipFile```(str) is the name of pos file containing chip snp posiitons
- ```nsnp```(int) no. of snps to be generated randomly or uniformly
- ```unif```(bool) if True, snps chosen are uniformly distributed; randomly otherwise
- ```minMaf```(float) minimum MAF
- ```name```(str) chip name

If chipFile is specified, it overrides the generation option.

##### Breeding population
Most of information needed is in ```Population``` class, which is basically a collection of individuals plus
some little extra information.

```pop = Population(genome=gfeatures, pedFile=None, t=[], label=None, qtns=qtn, gfounders=gbase)```

pedFile contains pedigree information, ie,

```id id_father id_mother```

where ids **MUST** be integer consecutive numbers from 1 onwards; id_father and id_mother **MUST** be 0 for
all base individuals, ie, the number of individuals in the vcf file. If pedFile is not specified, 
a dummy pedigree for all base individuals is generated (id 0 0 for id=1:nbase).

Individuals can be accessed by 

```Pop.inds[i]```

where ```Pop.inds[i]``` contains information of individual ```id=i+1``` (python array indices start at 0). Phenotypes can
be accessed by 

```Pop.inds[i].y```

Pop and ind info can be printed with:

```
# prints generic info
pop.print()
# prints detailed indiv info
pop.inds[i].print(gfeatures)
# boxplots average phenotype values per generation for phenotype itrait (= 0:ntrait)
pop.plot(trait=itrait) 
```

##### Retrieving genotype data 
**SeqBreed** internally keeps individual genomes only as a collection of recombination blocks and founder origins of
those blocks (Perez-Enciso et al. 2000, DOI: 10.1186/1297-9686-32-5-467), therefore enormoulsy saving cpu time and
memory in all operations on Individual objects. Actual genotypes must be retrieved though for GBLUP, GWAS or PCA 
analyses. This is achieved with ```do_X``` function

```X = do_X(inds, gfeatures, gbase, chip, minMaf=1e-6)```

where:

- ```X``` is an integer p x n np.array, p = n. markers, n = n inds.
- ```inds``` is an array of Individual objects (say ```pop.inds```)
- ```gfeatures``` is a ```Genome``` object
- ```gbase``` is a ```GFounders``` object
- ```chip``` is a ```Chip``` object
- ```minMaf``` is the minimum allele frequency for a SNP to be considered [1e-6]

**WARNING!!!!:** ```do_X``` has been parallelized with ```cython.parallel``` module but still can be expensive and memory
 demanding. Beware with large SNP datasets.

##### Implementing selection
Selection proceeds in three steps (see code above). First, estimated breeding values (EBVs) are obtained for the current
population. If molecular data are needed (GBLUP, ssGBLUP), an X matrix containing genotypes must be 
generated with ```do_X``` function. Second, the best individuals are mated and offspring are generated. 
Computationally, this is done by extending the current pedigree. Third, new genomes and phenotypes are generated 
for the new offspring (but not EBVs). Estimated Breeding Values are obtained with function

```sel.doEbv(pop, criterion='random', h2=None, X=None, mkrIds=None, yIds=[], nh=2, itrait=0)```

where:

- ```criterion``` (str) is one of: 'random', 'phenotype', 'blup', 'gblup' or 'sstep' (single step).
- ```h2``` is heritability used for genetic evaluation (needed for blup, gblup and sstep).
- ```X``` is an array with genotypes (needed for gblup and sstep), and can be obtained with ```do_X``` function
- ```mkrIds``` (integer numpy array) indices of genotyped individuals (indexed starting with 0) [required for sstep]
- ```yIds``` (numpy int array): integer array specifying individuals with data (indexed starting with 0) [all]
- ```trait```(int): trait index for which evaluation is performed [0]

In sstep, marker files should contain only information for genotyped individuals and in the same order. doEBV 
assigns EBV to pop.inds[:].ebv. Users can replace the function by any of their
choice such that selection is based on the custom defined criterion. If vector ebvs contains the custom values,
then

    nind = len(pop.inds)
    for i in range(nind): pop.inds[i].ebv = ebvs[i]

assigns new ebvs to pop object. The next step is to generate offspring from selected parents. 
This is performed with function 

```
newPed = gg.ReturnNewPed(pop, nsel, famsize, mating='random', generation=0)
```

where:

- ```nsel``` (int np two element array) contains the number of males and females to be selected as parents.
- ```famsize```(int): number of offspring per female
- ```mating```(str): 'random' (=='r') or 'assortative' (=='a') [random], with assortative mating, best males are mated 
to best females
- ```generation```(int): only individuals from generation onwards are considered as potential parents [all = 0] ,
this can be used to specify discrete or continuous generations.

The pedigree of newly generated offspring is returned (```newPed```), and pop object is extended with 
```Population``` method:

    pop.addPed(newPed, gfeatures, qtn, gbase, t=None)
    
where:

- ```gfeatures``` is a ```Genome``` object
- ```qtn``` is a ```QTNs``` object
- ```gbase``` is a ```GFounders``` object
- ```t``` is an integer with generation, and stored in vector ```pop.t``` , by default, t is increased by one and all
new individuals are assigned ```t = max(current pop.t) + 1```.

See accompanying script ```main.py``` for examples. 
  
##### PCA and GWAS
Both PCA and GWAS, the latter simply using a regression SNP by SNP. In either case, you must first 
generate the genotypic data X (This has been parallelized but can be expensive though).

```
X = gg.do_X(pop.inds, gfeatures, gbase, chip=chip1)
```

```
# Returns 2D PCA
pca = sel.Pca(X)
pca.fit()
pca.plot(labels=labels) # labels is an integer class vector of dimension # of inds to plot in colors
```

```
itrait = 0    # first trait is analyzed
gwas = sel.Gwas(X, chip1)  # WARNING: chip1 must match that used to get X
gwas.fit(inds=pop.inds, trait=itrait)

# alternatively, you can pass the phenotypes directly
y = np.array(list(pop.inds[i].y[itrait] for i in range(pop.n)))
gwas.fit(y=y, trait=itrait)

gwas.plot(fdr=True)        # plots FDR
gwas.plot()                # plots pvalue
gwas.print(gfeatures)      # prints gwas results
```

### Citation
Please cite this if you use or reuse the code:

M. Perez-Enciso, L.C. Ramirez-Ayala,  L.M. Zingaretti. 2019. SeqBreed: a python tool to evaluate genomic prediction 
in complex scenarios. Submitted.

### How to contribute
Please send comments, suggestions or report bugs to miguel.perez@uab.es. From 2020 on, I will be working at
INIA in Madrid (Spain), check at [INIA](www.inia.es) website or in the internet for my new email.
